Instructor: Peter Carr,  CPH 3637, Ext. 33990 pdcarr@uwaterloo.ca

 

Office hours by arrangement.

 

Teaching Assistants:

 

Nitish Midha nmidha@uwaterloo.ca

Rafael Aristides Sologaistoa rasologa@uwaterloo.ca

Swadha Sunil Vanikar ssvanika@uwaterloo.ca


Enrique Vera  evera@uwaterloo.ca 



MSci  442: Impact of Information Systems on Organizations and Society: Course Description   and Assessment

 

This   course is designed to familiarize the student with issues related to the impact of computer-based technologies on individual jobs, organizations, and the broader societal level. Particular emphasis will be placed on critical  examination of various issues including privacy, security, ethical concerns and professional responsibilities

 

Course Outcomes:


By the end of the course, students should be able to:

Identify the role(s) of information technology in society in a number of different fields.
Identify and explain the advantages and drawbacks of a particular information technology case in society.
 Synthesize ‘for’ and ‘against’ cases and highlight the strengths and weaknesses of these beliefs.
Generate questions that challenge and reflect a thorough understanding of the opposing argument.
Present well-constructed arguments using sound knowledge and evidence supporting the case.
Describe the impact of information technology in society with reference to potential future occupations.
Recognize that multiple perspectives on organizational, political, and social issues shape society and individual behaviour.
 

Course Format:

In each week of the course an issue will be introduced on the impact of information technology in society supported by content in the course blog http://impactofinformationsystemsonsociety.wordpress.com/ , which will include video interviews with leading specialists in the course subject matter. A Twitter feed also accompanies the course and will feature news items on areas featured in the course – it is:  @impactofinfo

From week 4 of the course onwards online course debates will take place. The format for the debates is described below.

Classes will take place in the classroom and online.  Course weekly classes will be streamed live online at 5.30 each Wednesday and recorded for later viewing. Classes will provide guidance on the course topics and activities and feedback on the debates.

Once groups have been formed, time will be available in the lecture for groups to meet with the professor. If your group wishes to discuss the work that it is doing on your Debate or Group Subject Video, please arrange a time for this with the professor.

There is no course textbook.


Course Topics

Week 1 Jan 8th: Introduction

Week 2 Jan 15th: Democracy

Week 3 Jan 22nd: Globalisation

Week 4 Jan 29th: Developing Countries 

Week 5 Feb 5th: How We Think 

Week 6 Feb 12th: Cities 

Week 7 Study Days 

Week 8 Feb 26th: Artificial Intelligence

Week 9 March 4th: Warfare 

Week 10 March 11th: Jobs and the Economy 

Week 11 March 18th: Big Tech

Week 12 March 25th: Privacy 

Week 13 April 1st: Course Review 

 

Course Assessment Note: Each course topic can only be used for one assignment.

This course has the following assessed elements:

1. Course Survey: 2 marks

2. Debates (1 per group): 25 marks

3. Group Subject Video: 23 marks

4. Mid term individual written assignment which must be on a week topic that has not been your Debate or Group Subject Video: 30 marks  Using a topic for more than one element will result in a mark of 0 for the second assignment. Due at 11.59 pm Sunday 1st March.

5. Final Take Home Examination: 20 marks. Issued Friday 27th March, due Friday 3rd April, 11.59 pm. .

 

1.Course Survey (2 marks)

Completion of an online survey in week 4 of the course and due by 11.59 pm on Saturday 1st February. The survey can be accessed with the following link: https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/V8N92YM 

 

2. Debates (from week 4 onwards): (25 marks)

Each week, from week 4 of the course, two teams will debate a topic from the course, one team taking a for position in the debate and the other taking an against position. Teams will be announced in Learn in week two of the course and a schedule of presentation weeks will be provided.

The debate will take the following format:

Each team will create a 10 minute video and post it to Youtube and post the link to the video in the Debating Chamber by Monday at noon of the debate week.
Each team will create 5 questions for the opposing team and post these by Wednesday at noon of the debate week. A maximum of 100 words is allowed for each question.
Each team will respond to the questions that they receive by Friday at noon of the debate week. A maximum of 250 words is allowed for the response to each question received.
The debate is graded individually. A peer feedback survey is available at https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/G8W6Y5B for the provision of feedback and this may influence the marks awarded.
 

Marks are awarded for the debate activity based on:

The video presentation (15 marks):

Are the main arguments on the topic included in the presentation? (6 marks)
Does the evidence presented in the video effectively support the arguments made? (6 marks)
How effectively are video presentation techniques applied? (3 marks)
2.       The questions created (4 marks) Do the questions reflect a good understanding of the arguments being presented by the opposing team? Do the questions effectively challenge the opposing team?

3.       The answers to the questions received (6 marks)

Do the answers to the questions received reflect good understanding of the case that the team is presenting? (3 marks)
Are the arguments presented in the answers well constructed and is the evidence presented relevant and convincing? (3 marks)


3. Group Subject Video (23 marks)

In each debate week, some teams will produce a Group Subject Video. Each group will create a 10 minute video that will brief the public on the subject that has been assigned to them – this will be a subject that has not been the topic of the group’s debate.

The post will introduce and explain the main areas of discussion on their subject. The video will enable viewer understanding of the topic assigned. You are encouraged to use your creative imagination to increase viewer attention. The length of the video should be no more than 10 minutes. The video should be posted to a public video site, such as YouTube. If the group is uncomfortable with sharing the video publicly, they should contact the professor and other arrangements can be made. The following table will be used to assess the blog video:

Item

Possible Marks

Inclusion of the main issues in the public debate on the topic

7

Video appearance and use of media

5

Persuasiveness of the arguments made (clearly presented and supported by evidence)

6

Inclusion of original content (created specifically for this video) from an external human source (video or audio interview) that is appropriate to the post and is not a student, faculty member or employee of the university

5


Video links should be submitted to the Forum that is provided for this in the Discussion area in Learn. 

The Group Subject Video activity is graded individually. A peer feedback survey is available at https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/G7RRSH5 for the provision of feedback and this may influence the marks awarded.

 

4. Mid Term Individual Written Assignment (30 marks)

Select a topic from the course that you are not participating in a debate for as a Debating Team or providing a Group Subject Video on and consider the impact that information technology has had on this topic. Overall, do you think that information technology  has had a positive or negative impact? Explain the evidence to support your arguments and the possible criticisms that might be made of these.  1500 word limit.

Due date: Sunday, 1st March at 11.59 pm via the dropbox in LEARN.

Marks are awarded for the mid term individual written assignment based on:

1. Explanation of the FOR case for the question topic. This should display evidence of having read the subject materials and should present a well argued case. Marks should be deducted if evidence of reading course materials is not present and/or if the case is poorly presented. (10 marks available)

2. Explanation of the AGAINST case for the question topic. This should display evidence of having read the subject materials and should present a well argued case. Marks should be deducted if evidence of reading course materials is not present and/or if the case is poorly presented. (10 marks available)

3. Provide a synthesis of the for and against cases, presenting a well argued conclusion that states the students' own beliefs on the topic. Provide a critical analysis of these conclusions that highlights the strengths and weaknesses of these beliefs. Marks should be deducted for a conclusion that is not well argued and for the absence or weakness of a critical analysis. (10 marks available) 

 

5. Final Take Home Examination (20 marks)

The Final Take Home Examination will be posted in Learn one week before the end of the course. It will comprise four questions based on content from the course. A maximum of 750 words will be allowed for each question.

Issued Friday 27th March, due Friday 3rd April, 11.59 pm.

Academic integrity: In order to maintain a culture of academic integrity, members of the University of Waterloo community are expected to promote honesty, trust, fairness, respect and responsibility. [Check the Office of Academic Integrity for more information.]

Grievance: A student who believes that a decision affecting some aspect of his/her university life has been unfair or unreasonable may have grounds for initiating a grievance. Read Policy 70, Student Petitions and Grievances, Section 4. When in doubt, please be certain to contact the department’s administrative assistant who will provide further assistance.

Discipline: A student is expected to know what constitutes academic integrity to avoid committing an academic offence, and to take responsibility for his/her actions. [Check the Office of Academic Integrity for more information.] A student who is unsure whether an action constitutes an offence, or who needs help in learning how to avoid offences (e.g., plagiarism, cheating) or about “rules” for group work/collaboration should seek guidance from the course instructor, academic advisor, or the undergraduate associate dean. For information on categories of offences and types of penalties, students should refer to Policy 71, Student Discipline. For typical penalties, check Guidelines for the Assessment of Penalties.

Appeals: A decision made or penalty imposed under Policy 70, Student Petitions and Grievances (other than a petition) or Policy 71, Student Discipline may be appealed if there is a ground. A student who believes he/she has a ground for an appeal should refer to Policy 72, Student Appeals.

Note for students with disabilities: AccessAbility Services, located in Needles Hall, Room 1401, collaborates with all academic departments to arrange appropriate accommodations for students with disabilities without compromising the academic integrity of the curriculum. If you require academic accommodations to lessen the impact of your disability, please register with AccessAbility Services at the beginning of each academic term.

Turnitin.com: Text matching software (Turnitin®) may be used to screen assignments in this course. Turnitin® is used to verify that all materials and sources in assignments are documented. Students' submissions are stored on a U.S. server, therefore students must be given an alternative (e.g., scaffolded assignment or annotated bibliography), if they are concerned about their privacy and/or security. Students will be given due notice, in the first week of the term and/or at the time assignment details are provided, about arrangements and alternatives for the use of Turnitin in this course.

It is the responsibility of the student to notify the instructor if they, in the first week of term or at the time assignment details are provided, wish to submit alternate assignment.
